JUDY WOODRUFF: Now a different
look at the
war in Afghanistan, through the
lens of inspiring
young women, making history by
way of education.
Last year, we brought you the
story of the
Zabuli girls school about 100
miles north
of Kabul. Just before Christmas,
the first
class graduated.
Beth Murphy of The GroundTruth
Project has
their story.
BETH MURPHY, The GroundTruth
Project: Winter
in Afghanistan signals that the
school year
is ending. In this village, this
unprecedented
graduation comes at a difficult
time in the
country.
RAZIA JAN, Founder, Zabuli
Education Center:
Today is a very special day for
us. It is
beyond my thoughts, beyond my
dreams that
we will be sitting here with our
first graduating
class.
(APPLAUSE)
BETH MURPHY: This is the first
time girls
in this village have ever
graduated from high
school. When the Zabuli
Education Center opened
in 2008, the villagers wanted it
to be a boys
school. But attitudes here have
changed.
RAZIA JAN: This is our first
young woman who
get married and she is still in
school. And
RAZIA JAN: This is our first
young woman who
get married and she is still in
school. And
she wants to continue her
education.
(APPLAUSE)
MAN (through translator): And
thanks to the
people of this village, who
really supported
and helped the school. Without
your help,
this wouldn't be possible.
RAZIA JAN (through translator):
And, also,
you really helped us. Without
your help, this
wouldn't be possible.
MUHAMMAD MALANGATAYE,
Afghanistan (through
translator): It is my duty, and
I feel a strong
responsibility. These are our
students, and
they are like my daughters.
Coming to this
ceremony will help convince them
to continue
their education, and also help
to convince
their parents.
BETH MURPHY: This first
graduation followed
many of the traditions you would
expect, parents
overcome with pride and lots of
time spent
reminiscing.
RAZIA JAN: You have opened a
door that, at
one time, I couldn't even
imagine. This is
RAZIA JAN: You have opened a
door that, at
one time, I couldn't even
imagine. This is
truly a dream come true.
BETH MURPHY: Highlights from
their high school
years include field trips to
Kabul, videoconference
calls with girls in
Massachusetts, where Razia
called home in the U.S., and the
groundbreaking
of the Razia Jan Institute, that
will allow
them to go to college right in
their own village.
Despite the successes,
challenges remain.
RAZIA JAN: When we started,
there was great
hope that things will get
better. But within
these eight years, things have
gone worse.
Many schools have been burned.
Many girls
have been poisoned. Believe me,
we are very
cautious. We can't put our
guards down.
BETH MURPHY: 2015 has not been a
good year
for Afghanistan. According to a
new Pentagon
report, things have gotten worse
since Afghan
forces took over the U.S. and
NATO-led mission
one year ago. Taliban attacks in
Kabul alone
jumped nearly 30 percent.
ROUALLAH SAHIB, Mayor of Deh
Sabz District
(through translator): The
security of this
village is better than a lot of
places, because,
here, we support the government
and police.
We are supporting them. The
international
community and Obama decided to
get out of
the country. They decided to
leave. At the
time, ISIS wasn't in Afghanistan
and the Taliban
was weak. But now ISIS is here,
is getting stronger.
BETH MURPHY: Stronger and more
deadly, 54
people dead after a 24-hour
Taliban assault
on the Kandahar Airport, an
attack that was
staged from a nearby school, and
then another
attack.
MAN (through translator): There
was an explosion
here. It was really powerful.
And right after
the blast, this area was
shaking.
BETH MURPHY: Amidst all the
danger, graduation,
a pocket of relative peace and a
success to
celebrate, it's the kind of
investment the
U.S. wants to protect and a
reason for troops
to remain on the ground.
The administration made an
about-face on pulling
U.S. troops, a recognition that
there's no
end in sight to increased
threats from insurgent
and terrorist groups.
President Obama announced the
change in October.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I have decided to maintain our
current posture
of 9,800 troops in Afghanistan
through most
of next year, 2016. This modest,
but meaningful
extension of our presence, while
sticking
to our current narrow missions,
can make a
real difference.
ROUALLAH SAHIB (through
translator): Without
their help, we will have more
terrorists here.
Regional security and world
security will
be at risk. We need them to be
here.
RAZIA JAN: America has and other
international
countries have invested so much
here. It is
really something that they
cannot lose completely,
because there are such great
other supreme
powers that will come in a very
passive way,
like Russia and China.
I think America will never
leave. America
is going to be always. I think
there is a
great interest of America in
this country
for their own security.
BETH MURPHY: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Beth
Murphy in Deh Sabz District,
Afghanistan.